OK, so, uh, let me ask you then, I
mean, and I guess that this is, uh, talk
and asking you this is very relevant because since
you are an author, since you write fiction, I
guess that as an author, you would have your
own opinion about this subject. But what do you
think about when people adapt a book to screen,
I mean, they make a movie or some, or
a ser a TV series, something like that and
To, and they change the source material. I mean,
to what extent or at what point are you
get frustrated, do you get frustrated when they change
the source material? I mean, uh, because I can
talk about the example of which some people have
been discussing a lot of the rings of power.
I don't know if you watch the show or
not. If not, there's surely plenty of other examples
we can discuss, but Uh, how frustrated do you
get, uh, how quickly do you get frustrated about
it? I mean, what kinds of things do they
need to change for you to get frustrated?
Well, I, I mean That would depend on the
source material and how good it is and how
attached I am to it. I think sometimes if
the source material was just like a great idea,
but not a good execution, a great idea in
general, and then someone with real talent comes in
and improves it. Yeah, um, then that's a great
thing, um. No, that, that's not always the case.
I mean, what, what is it they, they say
like great novels make terrible movies and bad novels
make great movies or something, you know what I
mean, but I think that Often that's true, because
kind of bad novels are often really good ideas,
which is why they resonated and did really well.
Like, it was a great idea for a story,
but the, you know, whoever wrote it just didn't
have the technical skill to execute. You know, it
just wasn't like a, a. A, a, a real
aesthetic writer maybe, or, you know, you know, I
mean, it could be a, a bunch of different
things. So it, that depends. Now, what What really
frustrates me, and this is adjacent to what you're
saying and sometimes is directly relevant, but I don't
like when, uh, people astroturf modern wars onto historical.
Um, Stories.
Well, yeah, I understand what you're saying.
Yeah, you know what I mean, and I think
that happens often with source material that people do
astroturf modern wars onto it because they, uh, uh,
whatever, it's, it's, it can be, they maybe they
believe it's gonna be more palatable to viewers and,
and maybe it's too complicated to explain why someone
would behave in a certain way. In that context,
and, um, or maybe they are afraid that the
character will not be sympathetic because they're behaving in
a way, in a way that a character would
behave in like 1746 or whatever it is. But,
um, you know, I love history, and so that.
Drives me crazy. When I think, no, that's not
how a woman would speak to her husband, or
a man out on the street in, you know,
in 1542. That's just not how she would do
things, you know? It doesn't mean that she wouldn't,
you know, figure out how to get her needs,
but she wouldn't do it in that way, you
know? Um, SO, I I, I, I figure if
the source material. What resonated enough. That the story
was really, you know, loved by a wider audience,
and then that story is, is bought by, you
know, The, a, a company that wants to put
it on screen, then why don't they stick to
the original source material? I just kind of, I
really don't understand that disconnect often because it, it,
the work has been done for you. People really
want to see the story the way it is.
Um, SO, you know. How are you going to
improve it? And if you are going to improve
it, great. Sometimes it gets improved quite a bit.
Mhm. How do you feel about it?
Yeah, I mean, there are things that frustrate me
and others that tend to frustrate a lot of
people that are really fans of the original story,
but don't frustrate me as much. I mean, for
example, there are aspects of changing reps, uh, the,
the traits of particular characters or character development. OR
certain aspects of the plot that are relevant to
how the story develops and how the characters develop
and so on. I mean, maybe things like that
frustrate me, but at the same time, I understand,
and of course I don't know all the ins
and outs of how this works because I, I,
first of all, I know basically nothing about how
it's done and I I never talked with anyone
about it, but I understand that when producing something
audio visual like a movie or a TV series,
there are certain limitations in terms of the extent
to which you can be faithful to the source
material because there are budget limitations and then you
have a 2 hour or 3 hour movie and
that's the I mean, your limit and if it's
a TV series, maybe it's 40, 50 minute episodes
or something like that, and 10 episodes per season,
something like that. So there's those limitations and then
Um, And then I, I mean, I guess that
there are things that don't bother me as much
if they change, like, for example, uh, I, I
can just tell you about uh certain things that
bothered some people about the Rings of Power. I
mean, the Rings of Power is an adaptation, or
it was supposed to be an adaptation of the
Silmarillion by Tolkien. Uh, IT'S not, it's just an
adaptation of the, basically some of the parts. Some
of, uh, some of, uh, some of the extra
bits of, uh, the Lord of the Rings, because
there's some. There's some uh it has some appendices,
and so what they were able to adapt was
that because they, they couldn't buy the rights for
the Silmarillion and then, uh, I mean, they changed
a little bit uh uh some things in the
plot and they have things that are not part
of the original story, but, but something that really
frustrated some people was the fact that, for example,
they made Uh, some elves, or at least one
elf, uh, black, and in Tolkien's story there's no
black elves. I mean, but those kinds of things
don't really bother me as long as the, the
character is interesting and it's faithful to the. I
mean, not so much the physical aspect of the
character, but the what tends to characterize psychologically an
elf or, I mean, for me
that's dealing with mythical creature. What does it matter
if it's mythical creature that has a different, I
don't know, race or ethnicity? I'm, it's, who cares?
I mean, it's invented, right.
Yeah, I think people just, people get very attached
to the way something is in their head, and
I get that, you know, and, and, and I
don't think it's even necessarily that, you know, someone
is a racist and that, that, that bothers them.
I think that it's often that they get so
attached to what something looks like, but no, no,
no, he was supposed to be blonde. You know,
like, um, years ago when, when Daniel Craig was
first tapped to be James Bond, people were genuinely
upset that he was blonde. You know, which I,
how, how could you possibly care? That doesn't even
matter. What matters is that he can embody the
character, and he did, and he did it really,
really well, and he won people over, but that
was just, that was such a strange sort of
um. It Invented it felt like such a, well,
no, it wasn't invented. I think it was real.
I think that people really were upset that he
wasn't gonna be like tall, dark and handsome, you
know, he was gonna be blonde and muscular and
look a little thug-like. Instead of elegant, you know,
which is a real departure from the character, but
it worked.
Yeah, and I mean, and then there are times
where it's the authors themselves that that get a
bit frustrated with the adaptations and not so much
the public because still talking about Tolkien, I mean,
I, I assume you watched the Lord of the
Rings, the trilogy, right? Oh yeah. Yeah, so I
mean, if you ask most Tolkien fans, most Lord
of the Rings fans, even the ones that are
really hardcore, most people would say that the adaptation
is at least a 9 or a 10 out
of 10, but Christopher Tolkien, Tolkien's son, He didn't
really like it because he thought it seemed like
an adaptation for, he said it seemed like an
adaptation for teenagers or something like that. It, it
had too much action, uh, and stuff like that,
so, I mean, I, I, I don't know what
all, what Tolkien himself would have thought of it,
but I, I mean, I think at least the.
Christopher Tolkien's, uh, I mean, he's already passed now,
but I took at least his opinion more or
less seriously because he was almost a co-author of
The Lord of the Rings because while Tolkien was
writing it, he gave lots of feedback and then
he finished the Silmari and then he added, he
edited a bunch of works that uh His father
left unpublished, so I mean
he was very close to the material. He was
a part of the material. I mean, he was
in that original tapestry. He wasn't just a critic.
Yeah, well, I know it can be hard to
separate yourself if I think if you're the author
and, and I, I. I can only imagine, right?
Um. I, I think that I would be happy
as long as it was good, even if it
was a bit of a departure, but you never
know. You might watch something and it just seems
so alien to you, um. Because you, you know,
you have it in your head that it should
look or, or, uh, feel a certain way, or
a character should be a certain way, and the
fact is people can interpret your work, or some,
you know, or, or an author's work, and that
interpretation isn't necessarily wrong, it's genuinely their interpretation, and
that's how they see it. I also, I imagine
that when you're going from, you know, uh, the
text to Uh, whether it's the stage or film
or Um, television, you know, our television show. I
do you know what a, are you familiar with
the term a game of telephone?
Uh, YES,
yeah, OK, it, it's, I bet it's kind of
like a game of telephone because the, all the
different people that touch the project and that are
talking about the project and brainstorm brainstorming about the
project from, you know, the original source material to
it actually, you know. Changing, and, um, getting on
its feet, there are a ton of people who
touch it, from the book to the stage or
the screen. And so, how could it not change
some, you know, even if the commitment is fierce
to the original source material, which I believe it
was, um, with the Lord of the Rings trilogy.
I think that the commitment was really fierce to
that source material, but it's still going to change.
By necessity and just because that's human nature, you
know, as we kind of put our, put our
finger, our, our fingerprints on things that even if
we're trying to be very loyal to, uh, you
know, a story we love. I think that our,
our, our perceptions become a part of it and,
um, and our own desires for it become a
part of it.
Yeah, I mean, and I guess that's true. I
mean, isn't it, I mean, shouldn't we just expect
that two different people would have two different kinds
of interpretation of the same fictional fictional story? I
mean, isn't that to be expected? It's like, I
mean, it comes to mind the example of Uh,
the manga Berserk, which was originally created by, by
Kent Kentoroura, and he died back in 2021, and
now, uh, it, uh, there, it's a colleague of
his, uh, a friend and a colleague of his
who's, uh, finishing the story. I mean, it's still.
Getting published, it hasn't finished yet, but there are
some people that say, oh, the, this is no
longer berserk. This is no longer Mura. I mean,
I guess, I mean, do you think that, uh,
uh, I'm missing the name of the new guy,
but do you think that he would be able
to 100% faithfully reproduce Mua's work? I mean, that's,
I guess, impossible.
Yeah, I think that's really hard. And I don't
know it. I think that people have different definitions
of, of faithful too, and first, I don't think
you can 100% reproduce somebody's work. I think that,
that's just I think that's nearly impossible. And no,
I think I'll just say no, that's impossible because
there's always going to be some filter between That
work, the, the original work and, and the adaptation,
right, or the interpretation, it, it, it just by
necessity, just because it's somebody else doing it. I
think that even if, say, the author of the
original work, um, Was hands on involved. And approving
everything. I, I, I, I even think that in
those situations, fans of the work. Take issue and
say, you know, this, no, no, no, no, no,
it should have been this way, you know, I
think that, um, you know, I read, uh, I,
I was reading, um, Comments, the comments section of
this uh of I think it was Diana, um,
Gabaldon's Facebook page. She's the author of Outlander, and
it's, I, I, I always find reading the comments
really interesting as an author, right? Um, THAT'S such
a beloved series, and it's also a television series.
And so you have fans of both the books
and the TV series, and also you have fans
who are just fans of the book and just
fans of the TV series all in the comments,
and she has like 700 comments on each post,
you know, I mean, it's unbelievable. But it's always
interesting to see how, um, How, well, rigid, I
guess, you know, and, and how really Just stuck
in a certain Idea of how that story should
be, should play out, you know, some, some fans
of the work are, and they'll actually get into
arguments with the author, you know what I mean?
And the author will say, well, no, that's actually
not the way it is. Um, I, I think
it's exactly right how they're portraying it on the
TV show, and that's exactly what I had in
mind, and, and, and the The fan will argue,
no, it's not. You know what I mean. Which
I, it's just, it's, it's fun and that's interesting
for me. I, I love comment sections. For that
purpose.
You're probably one of the few people who, I,
I mean, there are many people who read comments,
but there's not many people who like to read
comments.
Oh my God, I love reading other people's comments.
I, I, it's, it's a, it's a guilty pleasure.
But,
but, but, but I mean, just imagine for a
second that someone asked you to adapt one of
your books to move your television, uh, uh, I
mean, What if they made changes, what kinds of
things would frustrate you? Quaker, I mean, would it
be if they changed a character's personality, uh, the
way a character develops, uh, a plot, plot points,
or what
exactly? Um, VERY possibly, like I, I think if
they Um, made one of my characters a Mary
Sue, you know, you know that term, right? Um,
THAT would really bother me because I, you know,
I think that. I understand it, because it's, it's
hard to make a person's quirks sometimes, um, endearing,
and you want the audience to be endeared by
the character. You want them to be rooting for
the character, um. And so I, I, I understand
that wanting to massage the character a little bit,
if, if the character, it does a couple of
things that are acceptable, uh, on the page because
you can explain their behavior better. Yeah. You know,
and you're actually kind of in the character's head,
sometimes directly because it might be a first person
narrative, or indirectly even, you know, you, where the
context is just more complete in the novel, let's
say. So I, I understand why somebody would do
that, but I don't, I, I have a real
aversion to Mary Sue's, and so. Um, THAT would
probably get to me if I, if I thought
my character was just, oh, so right all the
time and always doing the right thing. It's like,
no, we don't always do the right thing. We
don't, even good people do questionable things sometimes, and
they have reasons, you know, and it's interesting to
show those reasons, even if the reasons you're sitting
back thinking, well, that's a load of BS, you
know what I mean? But sometimes it's not. Sometimes.
You know, within that context, if there's a really
good reason why they did a shitty thing, you
know.
Have you ever read American Psycho, the book, because
there's also the movie, but have you ever read
the book?
No, my husband did though, and we've talked about
it. It's so funny cause like there are certain
books that I've read that he hasn't or that
he's read that, um, I haven't, but I feel
like I've read them because I've discussed them with
him, you know what I mean? American Psycho is
one of them.
Uh, YEAH, but I was going to say there
are also things that are a little bit, uh,
difficult to adapt to, uh, an audio visual medium
because for if you read Brett Isanelli's, uh, book,
uh. There are many bits there that are. Uh,
I mean, really extreme in terms of the violence
and very graphic, uh, very, very gory, and I
mean, I don't think that. Unless it was one
of those movies that. Uh, THAT, that was produced
independently and then eventually would become a cult movie,
uh, with extreme violence, I guess that it wouldn't
be possible for the director of American Psycho to
really adapt those bits because it would be too
much graphically. So I mean there are perhaps parts
of the Of the books were with very detailed
descriptions of things that really have a very. Uh,
uh, uh, ARE emotionally very impactful in a negative
way that perhaps are hard to adapt to the,
to the screen. So,
yeah, and also it depends on how you want
to tell the story of American Psycho. If you're,
you know, if you're the, the director and you,
um, You want to get, uh, you know, you
want to focus on the character more, then you
might feel that the gore is really distracting, and
you want some of the gore, because, obviously, you
want to demonstrate that this person is capable of
doing really terrible things and And um that's an
important part of the character, but, you know, gore,
uh, you know, the gorier you get, I think,
in a movie, the more it becomes about the
gore. Yeah, and Uh, it It can be really
difficult then to build characters that people Um People
respond to, you know, and that they're, they care
deeply about because just so much else is going
on and people's heads are getting chopped off and
you know what I mean. It's, it, it, I
mean, that works in something like um I don't
know, the Gore Gore works in, in, in. Like
Game of Thrones kind of stuff, you know, where
you're really, where you're dealing with a time when
it, or a time, you know, it's pretend time,
but, uh, you know, where there's a lot of
war and, um, and people aren't using guns, they're
using axes and, you know, maces and all this
stuff, uh, because it's isolated, you know, OK, this
is happening during a battle. Or, um, or when
someone is being attacked or assassinated and then you
know, you have long stretches of time when people
are just interacting. But in a story like American
Psycho, I mean, just in the title, it's sort
of about what he's doing. And if you spent
the whole time. Focusing on the gore. I'm, I'm
not sure that you would get as invested in
the character as you do when you're, perhaps when
you're reading it, you know, when you have, again,
more context and more access to this person's life
and their, their thoughts and their behaviors and, you
know, the way they move through the world.
Yeah, and I guess in terms of violence, I
mean, it makes sense to present a lot of
violence when it has some sort of purpose. Just
like, for example, a moral purpose. I don't know
if you ever watched the movie Come and See,
which is a World War II movie made by
uh in the Soviet Union in 1985. OK, so
there's this movie Come and See and. I mean,
in the, it's an extremely, particularly at a psychological
level, an extremely violent movie, but I mean, and
you can even get a bit sick watching it,
it's really extremely violent, but, uh, I mean, it
for me at least it makes sense for it
to be as violent as it is because it's
sort of. Presenting a sort of moral message against
war. I mean, it's presenting war as being awful,
as being really an extreme form of uh. I,
I, I'm in an extreme event in human life
and stuff like that, so, um, I, I guess,
I, I guess that what I'm trying to say
is that for me personally, it makes sense if
the violence they present, even it's really extreme. As
a purpose to it, if, if, if it's just
violence for violence's sake, for violence's sake, uh, I
mean, I don't know, it doesn't sound as good.
It's, it's, it comes off as a carnival show
then, um, I, you know, I might have seen
Commony. I definitely saw a Soviet era. Um, FILM
about World War II a few years ago. Um,
MY, both, my two older children were, uh, Russian,
they had double majors also in like Russian language
and literature, and so we would be watching these
Russian movies together all the time, but I, I
saw one that I found very, very disturbing, and
I remember my son warned me, he's like, this
is gonna be a rough ride, so I'm just
letting you know, and it was. I can't remember,
um, what it was called though. It started in
a small village, maybe that was. Is that, yeah,
OK, I've seen it. I've seen it, yes, very
disturbing movie, very violent, awful, and yet really good,
and you do get invested in the characters, very
much so.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, I mean,
but, but do you agree with that, that, I
mean, uh, what you present in the story, I
mean, not just in terms of violence, but focusing
on violence now, it has to serve a purpose,
right? Otherwise it's just, I don't know, violence, pornography
or
something like that. Definitely. And by the way, I
love writing violence, and it's hard. It's very, very
hard. I like writing action and I like writing
violence. I, I mean, I, I don't know how,
how much of my stuff you've read, but it's
certainly not focused on that. But there, there are
spurts of it, I, that I think I use
judiciously in my In my stories, because I feel
like that, I don't know, that that. That I,
I, what I do find interesting, the, the juxtaposition
between like, You're going along, and even if things
are ramping up and stuff is happening around you
that, that, um, it is ominous, you know, and,
and, and frightening, then Wham, when the violence hits,
I feel like it's very, very powerful. And it's,
you know, I liken it to, if you're walking
down the street and you feel like somebody's following
you. That's, and that's. And, and you're, you know,
the tension increases, but, and hopefully it would never
get to this, but then when the person does
like pull a knife or a gun on you
and says, give me your purse or whatever it
is that they want, you know, that's the big
reveal. Yeah.
So let me ask you another thing. When it
sometimes people get a little bit frustrated. Uh, WHEN
they are expecting characters to act a particular kind
of way or to react a particular kind of
way to something that happens in the story, uh,
and they don't, uh, uh, but, but I mean,
When, when is it that, or how do we
esta do you establish the difference between a character
acting out of character and they acting in the
unexpected way uh due to character development? I mean,
how, how do you establish that difference?
That's a really hard question. Um. For me, when
I feel like something is, um, artificial, it's usually
because I See Something changes and I watch it,
let's say, change from the character. You know, maybe
the way the character was written in the novel
to A point of view that the storyteller, whether
it's the director or the showrunner or whatever it
is, um, is really attached to and wants to
superimpose onto that character. Maybe to tell, maybe to
make a moral or political point, you know, um.
That's when I usually sort of cringe and I
think, well, that's not right, you know, that's not
necessarily how the character would see the world, and
it's maybe wasn't in the original source material, or
if, like, this screenplay or whatever it is, was
the original source material and it's an original screenplay,
and, and that happens, it's, again, it's usually because
the, the writer or whoever it is who's in
charge of the storytelling process, ultimately, um, It makes
a decision that kind of happens outside the character
if that makes sense. And that I don't like.
I mean, I, I think you and I've had
this discussion in the past, but I, when, whenever
I've I, I've seen this in my own work
when I have, um, whenever I've decided to write
a real event into a work of fiction, even
if it's like appropriate for the time period and
it, it, it stays, uh, true to the event
and the event would belong in that situation, it's
interesting how, um, If anyone is, anytime a reader
has called out, you know, this didn't seem authentic
to me, it's always when I wove a real
event into a work of fiction. Which is kind
of funny, because I'll be like, I don't think
that happened. I'm like, well, actually, that's the only
thing that really did happen in this whole story,
you know, and, and I put it in there,
not to make a point or anything like that,
but because I thought it would be interesting color,
you know, what, because it, it was real, if
something that really did occur within the sort of
theater that I'm writing in, you know what I
mean? But somehow, um, They smelled something amiss, and
they were right. No, they weren't right that it
didn't happen, that it wouldn't really happen, cause it
did, but they were right that I Clearly didn't
finesse it enough, or I wasn't somehow able to
Um, make it seamless. Yeah. So, and I think
that, I think more often it happens that someone
is trying to make a point, that a writer
really wants to make a point with the character,
and, and they don't realize how far they've stepped
outside of the character to make that point.
Right, I, I mean, but it's complicated, right, because,
uh, I mean, sometimes, I guess that there are
times where the, the writer or the creator just
does a bad job of it and raps just
makes the character do this or that or acting
this or that way. Just to serve the plot,
because it's convenient or something like that, but there
are other times where people, the readers or people
who are following the story in some way, get
frustrated because a character might act. Out of character,
but it uh it is something, it is simply
a matter of, uh, they, of them changing their
own behavior in particular ways because of character development,
because of something they might have experienced or Um,
something that might have happened in their, I mean,
in the story, of course, that make them change
in ways. I mean, and then it can be
in a way that makes sense or in a
way that doesn't make much sense, but I mean,
it's complicated, I guess, to thread that line between
showing a character that is in a plausible way.
Uh, DEVELOPING and a character that is just behaving
out of character, I guess.
Uh, YEAH, it, it, it, it, it does. It
takes a lot of skill to do that and
a lot of thought, and sometimes maybe there isn't
enough time to think it through, and there's real
deadline pressure, so I, you know, I can understand
how even, you know, a really talented storyteller can
make that. Mistake, right? And can, and not make
it seamless. I mean, I, I think the, what
bothers me most is when a character just like
turns evil, you know what I mean. And you
don't see the process, or it goes crazy, and
you don't see that process either. They seemed like
a, like a reasonable person, and then suddenly, you
know, um, they, they started behaving in ways that,
that you as a reader or viewer are sitting
back thinking, What happened there?
I, I mean, I guess, I guess that's some
of the most interesting instances where the creator has
to suddenly make a character be a a a
person that is completely different from what she's seen
this in crime stories because I mean you are
out to find who who who committed the crime.
Crime and I mean you have to be careful
to drop some subtle hints here and there that
perhaps the true criminal is that sort of person,
that sort of person who would commit a crime,
but at the same time they're trying to hide
that they did it.
So, but that's kind of, that's a little different
though, because in that case that person's always been
the criminal, you know, the evildoer they're, but they're
pretending they're not. And so the, the hints that
you need to drop, for one, is that they're
pretending, but there's a certain You give a certain
grace, I think, to, uh, that story then, and,
and the way that character unfolds, because you understand,
oh, that person was pretending to be a nice
person, but really all along, they were the bad
person who would kill you, right? It's, I think
that what, what is tough is when a character
really does either turn evil. Suddenly, you know, or
turn good, suddenly. They were like this terrible evil
doer, and then suddenly they're like, well, I have
seen the light. Now, maybe you can do that
really cleverly, like, you know, with the, the sun,
the conversion of Saint Paul, but then there was
a supernatural element to that, you know, where God
knocked, you know, visited Paul and knocked him off
his horse, you know. Um, HE wasn't just riding
along thinking, you know, I just slaughtered a village,
but that was a terrible thing to do. I'm
going to be good now. You know what I
mean? That's, that, that just doesn't. It just doesn't
work for me. Yeah,
maybe, maybe it took some psychedelics and had a
mystic experience,
you know, there has to be some reason then
if you're gonna have a very sudden. Um, TRANSFORMATION,
and they do happen, you know, I'm not saying
that a character can't have a sudden transformation, or
even a human being can't. There's certainly evidence of
that, um, in, in terms of characters of it
being done well, right? Or, and, you know, it
it exists, but doing it plausibly, I think, is,
is what is a big trick because, um, It's,
otherwise it just looks like. A trick on the
page, you know, that 11 moment the character is
relatively reasonable and then the next that they've gone
completely off the rails for no earthly reason. Except
you know, you know,
yeah, but you know it's interesting because just the
other day I was thinking because first when I
thought about talking with you about the topic of
being out of character versus character development, I was
thinking that this is something that if it's done.
Wrong, it's something that frustrates people, uh, when they're
reading or watching a story, but actually I was
thinking that it also bothers people when it happens
in real life when people act in ways that
uh are unexpected, that are out of character, so
to say. Uh, AND, uh, particularly when it's in
ways that people find negative or that have negative,
uh, consequences, and uh, people, and I mean people
are more than one dimensional. People are complex and
perhaps people behave in different ways with different people
in different contexts, and perhaps if someone would see
a friend, uh. I, I don't know, interacting with
someone they interact with in a different way. They
would think that that he or she is a
hypocrite or something like that, but they're really not.
They're just, I mean, we just tend to behave
differently with different people in different contexts, but um,
sometimes people really don't like when other people do
unexpected things.
You know, I, I think that's, yes, and I
think that's the problem, uh, with, uh, People who
tend to write fiction as if they're court reporters.
You know what I mean? And, and just, you
know, when I've, when I've worked. Helping people edit
their work, helping people edit their, their, their writing,
um. Sometimes you'll, you'll be talking to a, a
writer and they'll say, but that, that would really
happen. I knew someone who did that, who behaved
like that. And coming back to like what I
said when I tried to insert something real and
say, well, that may very well be. Um, BUT
when you're Writing a work of fiction, by and
large, you have to explain that character's behavior in
a way that maybe you, you don't get that
explanation in real life because, like you said, you
don't have access to, um, necessarily to why they're
behaving in this way, uh, you know, why they
are, you know, going along, say, with a point
of view that you know, they don't agree with
when they're talking to a certain person, you know,
or, um. You know, whatever the circumstance might be,
you know, sometimes things seem very abrupt in real
life because we don't have a vision into a
person's complete life or their thoughts. And, but in
fiction, you do kind of have vision into it.
You have to, because it's your job to make.
That character's behavior, um, relatable and real feeling. You
know, even if you're writing a crazy supernatural story
that is so clearly not real and is full
of magic realism, you have to make it feel
real, otherwise, it, it's not satisfying. You have to
believe that, um, You know, this vampire or werewolf
or whatever would behave this way or or magician
or whatever it is that that um That you're
writing about, they, they're, it has to be grounded
in, in reality and in how we interpret reality
for it to be effective, I think.
I mean, even when you're writing fantasy or something
like that, uh, I guess that, of course, you're
free to create your own rules, the rules under
which the story you're creating or the The universe
you're creating operates under, but you have to stick
to the rules, otherwise, I mean, it, otherwise people
get bothered as well because all that shouldn't have
happened. I mean, these are the rules. You've decided
on these rules, you have to follow your own
rules, right? I mean, it's like when In Shonan
manga, I mean, Shonan manga is basically manga for
uh teenagers, adolescents. It involves a lot, a lot
of fighting and stuff like that, and it usually
has power systems for the characters. I mean, if
one of the characters suddenly breaks the power system,
people get bothered because, oh, that shouldn't have happened
there, come on, right? I mean, you are, you
are free to create your own rules, but you
have to keep them in mind, in mind when
writing your story.
Definitely, and you know, I I think one of
the things that People have a difficult time, um,
regulating, let's say, when they're writing, writers, uh, that
I've noticed is when, um, They are really kind
of personally invested in a certain, uh, in a
certain point of view, you know, and, you know,
they They, they maybe they, they pro project more
onto behaviors than what a reader might perceive, if
that makes sense. I mean, to give you an
example, uh, He I'm just making this up. Um,
IF a guy is being dismissive towards a female
character. And then the um that that guy character
gets treated abominably by another character or gets killed
and everyone's just like sort of like he deserved
it, you know what I mean? AND to try
to explain to the writer, but to a reader,
he really didn't deserve it. He made a dismissive
comment and you chopped his head off. You know,
I mean, I'm being, you know, I'm, I'm being
hyperbolic, but, you know, People do that because they,
they're projecting their own experience onto that person, and,
and that one character who say, made the dismissive
comment, um, all the reader saw or read was
that dismissive comment, whereas the writer had a whole,
like, that was just the tip of the iceberg,
and then there was the whole bottom part of
the iceberg for the writer of resentment and things
that they'd seen and experienced that they were projecting
onto that character, but That didn't make its way
onto the page. It was just that one dismissive
comment, you know, and then the guy got, you
know, skinned alive or whatever, and, and, and it
was treated as if that was just desserts, you
know what I mean? It's, it's stuff like that,
that I think is, can be really hard for
people to regulate, because, um, I, I think what
is, uh, Maybe not intuitive about the writing process
for people, is just how much you have to
be able to step back from it. Because it,
it's such a personal process, and people view it
as so personal that, oh my God, when you,
you know, I, I mean, I remember talking to
someone and they asked me if I Fantasize about
my characters, the way one might, if you watch,
say, a television show or you read someone else's
work and you develop your own fan fiction in
your head, and I said, I never do. And
they were like, what do you mean you never
do? You, you must love these characters, you know,
you made them up, you wrote them, and I'm
like, I never I never ever fantasize about my
own characters. I mean just never. The only time
I fantasize about them is when I'm trying to
figure out what they're gonna do next, but I
don't think, that's not a fantasy, that's That's a
lot more strategic than a fantasy. A fantasy is
a lot more organic, right? And it, it caters
to your own desires, and, um, it's fantasies are
rarely appropriate. To put into your work, too, because
they're, because they're so personal, and rarely do they
resonate with other people the way it might, the,
the way they might resonate with you. Because they're
so particular to you and what your needs might
be at that moment. But, um, But I always,
I, I always try to explain that. I'm like,
no, no, no, you actually, in order to, to
write effectively, most of the time, not always, there's
always an exception, but most of the time, you
actually have to have quite a bit of distance
from your work. Because you also have to be
able to kill your darlings, like they say, you
have to be able to go back to your
work, and a lot of times take out things
that You might feel, oh, I did such a
good job on that, you know what I mean?
Or, oh, that would make such a beautiful scene
if it ever made it into a movie or
whatever. There are so many, you know, different ways
that you might perceive something that you've written and
become so attached to it. Um, THAT it's hard
to To take it out when it really does
not belong and
drives. Yeah, so I, I guess I, I've never
asked you this before, but when you're developing a
story for a new book, how do you do
it? I mean, what do you think about and
how much do you plan? Do you think, do
you think about themes, the plot, the, the characters,
specific events? I mean, I've heard. Uh, AUTHORS saying
that, for example, George RR Martin said that what
made him create uh Song of Ice and Fire,
or a Song of Ice and Fire was that
he had a dream about a wolf, and then
it was from that dream that he started, uh,
building, uh, uh, doing his world building, let's say,
and Uh, Aichiro, the, the creator of One Piece,
said that from the very beginning, he had the
ending of the story already set, and of course,
people who follow One Piece like me, we're all
excited to eventually know what that ending will be
like, but I mean, how, how do you plan
things, basically?
Um, uh, THAT'S evolved over the years, um. I
used to plan very little. I was what writers
call a pantser. Um, THERE are pants and plotters.
Pantsers like flying by the seat of their pants
and plotters both plotting, right? Um, I used to
be much more of a pantser, and I would
start kind of like what the George RR Martin
vein, maybe I had. An image in my head,
whether it was from a dream or a story
that, you know, one of my, my family members,
my grandmother, say, told me, and I found that
image really powerful and, um, started writing a story
around it. And, uh, you know, earlier, like definitely
in my first few novels, I was not, um,
thinking much further ahead than the next chapter. And
now I I pretty much plot out a novel
before, I mean, that doesn't mean it's not gonna
change as I'm writing cause I might be like,
oh, no, that, that's not gonna work, or, oh,
I have a better idea, right? But I, I
plot out a whole novel beforehand, and it's funny,
I realized I was talking to my partner Janet,
my business partner, Janet, and um, I, I was
telling her how much I realized that that I'm
like, haunted by places after I've been there and
I, you know, I wrote my Cold War thrillers
after I left Eastern Europe. Um, I, cause I
was just I, I would have never even occurred
to me to start writing them while I was
there. It just wasn't on my mind that that's
not what I would have been writing about at
all. But as soon as I'd been, I was
back in the US, suddenly I started thinking about
my experience there. And with, um, My sort of
romanticsy series, Breath that, you know, takes place in
the desert, ironically. Um, I wrote that from Virginia,
and that was completely like a flight of fancy,
right? And then I ended up moving to the
desert, and what did I do when I moved
to the desert? I wrote a whole story that
takes place in Appalachian, Virginia. Yeah. Which is where
I'd spent the last 20 years, and it's a
horror story. Um, AND a gothic romance kind of,
and so, I, I, I, I tend to kind
of get haunted in that way, and, and maybe
that's just. My way of doing things, I don't
know.
But uh how much of it do you plan
to have? I, I mean, because, because I know
all of it. Now I plan all of it
ahead. It makes, I've, I've found that, like, I,
I just work a lot faster and it's, it
generates ideas for me to have an idea of
where I'm going. And like I said, I might.
Change where I'm going. I mean, I just did
that recently. I've started writing the second book in
this Appalachian folklore, and, um, the way it The
the way I was gonna plot it completely changed
when I came up with a new idea, but
I replotted it, you know what I mean? And
so, which is not something I did. Um, I,
I mean, I kept, I was doing it incrementally
more and more, but now I, you know, with
this new series, I, I'm officially a plotter and
not a pantsr anymore.
Mm. Yeah, but no, because I was wondering. Uh,
I mean, it's interesting people, different people have different
ways of creating stories because, and, uh, I was
wondering to what extent doing things, uh, uh, planning
less can have some risks in terms of contradicting
some of your previous story later and things like
that, because, for example, Ichiro of the and I,
I mean, I, I guess he does a great
work when it comes to uh dealing with new
elements that he adds to his own story because
I learned recently that, OK, so there's the main
character Luffy, and then initially he planned on what
would be perhaps a 500 chapter manga, still a
very long manga, but much shorter than what it
already is. It's already on chapter 1140 or 50,
something like that. And so, but he, he had
planned that Luffy would fight the emperors of the
sea, and then apart from the emperor. Yeah, the,
the warlords, and then just he said that he
had what he calls the supernova, that is the
the pirates that began traveling the seas the same
time Luffy did that are part of his generation.
He added them just the, the same chapter that
he had the idea of adding them, so I
mean it could have gone really wrong and for,
for some. In, uh, for some reason it didn't,
or at least the story seems very consistent, so.
I, I mean, I was wondering how much you
really have to plan for the story to end
up looking good.
I, I think that one way or another, uh,
if you don't. Plan it, at least partly upfront,
um, you will have to You have a lot
more discipline in the editing process to make sure
that you have, you know, connected all the dots.
Because, you know, when you're adding elements, which I
still do, even if I plan something out, like
I said, I completely changed, um, a, a significant
element of the second book in this, um, Moon
Witch series that I'm writing. And it I, I
Just replotted it, because otherwise, if I had, if
I, at this point, if I write by the
seat of my pants, I don't want to be
doing as much work on the back end as
I've done in the past. Um, I want a
more disciplined structure, and this is probably the most
disciplined I've been. Um, FROM the, you know, on
the front end. IF anything that I've ever written,
but I, I, I, I think I used to
believe, and maybe there was some truth to it
then, that if I put too much. Um Emphasis
on plotting. That I, I wouldn't, um, that it
would strangle the story. I think probably a lot
of pans believe that, and I definitely believe that,
and I don't believe that anymore. I actually think
it works better and that you're still welcome to
add surprises and to be surprised by your own
imagination and decide that you're going to make significant
changes. Now, those significant changes, you got to think
them through, but, um, I, I really like the
discipline now of Having to think through. An entire
novel or story arc before, um, before I sit
down and it, it energizes me, and I, I
did not think it would when I was starting
out. I thought that it would strangle me.
Yeah, I, I mean, because I was asking you
that, I mean, how much someone needs to plan,
because I guess that, because I also, um, I
mean, I, I don't, I don't interact, uh, directly
myself, but I follow some, let's say, communities of
people online who are uh One Piece fans and
Lord of the Rings fans, but particularly One Piece
fans because it's an ongoing series. Uh, AND I
guess that sometimes people might be reading a little
bit too much into. Uh, WHAT the, what the
other, what the author made there. I mean, the,
because sometimes they go back in the story and
they say, oh, this, that happened now, we foreshadowed
it, uh, 600 chapters ago. I mean, I'm not
sure if that's really, if that was really foreshadowing
or if it's you're reading too much into it
or Now that you know the outcome, you go
back and you're sort of uh using your hindsight
bias to try to find clues here and there
that this or that would happen and was planned
far ahead because uh, I mean, it's not taking
any merit from the author because he, I mean
it's so A well written story and even if
you're not foreshadowing something or giving hints that something
is going to happen. Uh, 500 chapters I have
of time, I guess, uh, that's, that's still a
very good story, but sometimes I think that people
read too much into, uh, I mean, they, they
want to, uh, for even the smallest details to
have meaning, and sometimes they're just details.
That's absolutely true, and I mean. One of the
things that I find Interesting and that I'm still
learning as an author is just, like, what details
resonate with a reader and that they'll remember, and
what details won't and why that matters, because, um,
if There are certain types of details, and there
are, that resonate with the reader. They're going to
come to very different conclusions, and they're going to,
um, It's gonna affect whether or not they believe
your story and the way it concludes, even if
you've added all the right details into the story.
But if the details that You wrote into the
story are not the kind that readers remember and
res and that resonate with them, that maybe play
into the proper tropes for the genre that you're
writing and whatever the, the reason is, then even
if you have expertly plotted it, they're gonna walk
away scratching their heads. And that's been a really
hard lesson for me. Um, AND that's something that,
at least I feel that you can only learn
through experience. Especially if you're writing a more complicated
piece that's got maybe a little more, you know,
meat to it and that's not, um, a, a
sort of strictly on point, here are your beats.
Um, YOUR, here's, here's your 15 beat structure for
your, you know, small town romance or whatever. I'm
not taking anything away from that. I'm just saying
that, you know, those, the expectations are so clear
in those, and the readers are so, um, Passionate
about those expectations being met when they're such fans
of the genre, that you as a writer have,
uh, more limited, or you're more limited in what
you're able to do. Because they're not going to
forgive you if you, um, if you deviate even
a little bit, you know what I mean? And
so that, that kind of those details are. Like
if they're, I, I figure if they're just Easter
eggs, you know what Easter eggs are, right? Just
Easter eggs that you, that you put in, um,
and it doesn't really matter for the plot at
all. Those are just there for people who may
or may not find them, right? Um, BUT when
they do, they just love it. That that that
was a part of the story, then I think
that it doesn't matter, and that you can pepper
your whole manuscript for these drags, but if the
details that you're writing. You, you have to be
very well aware of what details are resonating or
going to resonate with your reader, so that you
don't leave them. Confused and confused at the end,
and thinking that you didn't plot this right. You
know, you didn't, you didn't give them what they
needed. So, that's got to be a really, uh,
you know, for the, this writer of, of, of
this 1000 chapter epic that you're talking about. I
I, I have nothing but admiration from that. That's
gotta take it for that, that's gotta take tremendous
skill to be able to um take a reader
on that journey and still, uh, Still satisfy them
and and make them feel like the story is
coherent, you know.
And I mean, how much do you think that?
Or how much do you do this, how much
do you insert or imbue the story with your
own personal values, being it moral values or political
beliefs, something like that. I mean, because one thing
that bothers some people is that authors who are
more post-modern, let's say like. If you compare George
RR Martin to Tolkien, Tolkien is a very classic
kind of writer. I mean, he has very clear
moral values in his story, and George RR Martin
is, tends to be a little bit more ni
nihilistic, let's say, tends to be a little bit
more, all characters act out of their sort of
own self-interest, and it's not that. The good guys
always win or the bad guys always lose. I
mean, it's just a matter of, uh, I, I
guess, playing the game of Thrones, and if you
don't play the game well, you lose, if you
play it right, you, uh, uh, uh, you, you
win, but not because of your own moral character,
it's just that, uh, you're playing the game right
and. I mean, how, how much do you care
about the morality of, uh, that is imbued into
a story?
I, I think I'm probably more of a classical.
Um, Writer than that, then then I'm certainly I'd
like I'm, I don't think I'm a nihilistic one,
even if, if I write about some pretty apocalyptic
scenarios. Um, I, I've, I love classical storytelling, you
know, I love fairy tales, like, you know, the
great fairy tales. I love mythology. I love folklore.
I love it, you know, that's, that's, it's extremely
satisfying to me. Doesn't mean that something like Game
of Thrones isn't, you know, I loved Game of
Thrones. I loved Walking The Walking Dead, you know
what I mean? I love those stories, but I
tend, I just tend not to write them because,
um, I love, I love writing. More classical stories
that I, I love redemption arcs, you know, they,
they, they mean a lot to me. I love,
um, That doesn't mean that, like, everybody gets redeemed
sometimes in my stories either, and same, I think,
in classical literature. I think that there are people
who really do, uh, succumb to their demons, and
I think that's a really interesting part of classical
storytelling as well. Um. So, not, you know, not
everybody, it, it, it doesn't get all tied up
in a bow at the end, um, with a,
you know, happy ending for all, but I do
like that classical structure. I think that it really
resonates. With most people too. And um Maybe that's
one of the reasons why I, I like. Kind
of writing in that realm cause I feel like
it transcends, um, Cultures and you, you know, that
there's something that that It's for everyone in it.
Yeah, it can be shared. More widely, and I
don't even mean that like trying to get a
wide audience or anything like that. I mean, I
like the Uh, you know, I love being able
to just the fact that we can discuss stories
together even though, you know, we're from different cultures,
and I mean granted, we're both from Western culture,
we have a lot of, we have a lot
of dotted line and some solid line connections in
our cultures. It's not like talking to somebody who
is from a completely different, um, who has a
completely different perspective.
Yeah, and I, and I mean even artistically speaking,
we've read lots. Of the same books and watch
lots of the same movies. So I mean in
terms of artistic culture we're, we have a very
common basis.
I do. I don't like when I'm talking to
you. I don't feel like there's really any disconnect
culturally. I feel like we're very much on the
same page, but I, you know, I do, you
know, love the idea of being able to, to,
um. For it to be like a, a big
myth, you know. I like that kind of big
myth, uh. TENT, I guess. I feel really comfortable
in it.
OK, but, but then, I mean,
but no, I don't like it when something is,
say, overtly political or heavily, um, heavily handed when
it comes to a certain, uh, Maybe religious point
of view or something like that, religion at all
or politics for that matter.
OK, I, I will come back to the political
then, but when it comes to morality. I mean,
uh, what, what do you do to avoid
it
being moralistic? I mean, instead of just being a
moral story, being like a morally preachy, uh, being
morally preaching, uh, uh, I mean, your own values,
you know what I mean here.
I think the biggest defense against that is writing
um multifaceted characters that are whole people and not,
um, you know, caricatures. It's, it's really, you, I
think you get into trouble as a writer, um,
or storyteller. With, say, politics and morality, when, um,
You're writing your opponents, in a kind of silly
way, and, and they're cartoons and not real human
beings who have a, a point of view that
you simply don't share. Yeah, but that it's not,
um, it's not because they're necessarily inherently evil, and
even if they are, by the way, inherently evil,
I think that there has to be some richness
to that. There has to be some explanation of
it that um makes It makes that character whole,
that makes them multifaceted, that makes them interesting. You
know, I don't think cartoon characters are interesting. And
um. I mean, you know.
I, I mean, I'm, I mean, I guess that
cartoon characters can be funny. I mean, if, if
you, if you watch Tom and Jerry, I mean,
it's for kids, but it,
no, no, no, that's not what I mean. I
love
cartoon, yeah, yeah, yeah,
I love Bugs Bunny. I love SpongeBob. I mean,
uh, making a, I should say caricature, not a
cartoon character, you know, when you, when you don't
take your opponent, whether it's a moral opponent or
a political opponent, seriously. It, it dumbs down a
project, whatever it is, it dumbs down a story.
You must take them seriously. Yeah, and you can't
assume that you are also smarter than they are.
Yeah. Or also more moral than they are, um.
It, it, uh, I, I, I, I, I just
think that, you know, the IQ of a project
drops really considerably when that happens, when that sort
of, when there's that overt moralism and overt politicization
that, that no longer. Rings true of people, you
know, yeah.
Yeah. Uh, AND, and about the politics. I mean,
there there was. There's an author that I, I,
I mean, I just can't like what she, what
she wrote. I mean, it's just too, it's just
too silly for me that, uh, Ayn Rand, I
mean that was shrugged. It's, I mean, it's basically,
uh, shoving her own politics on your phone. And
I, and I mean, but what, what one interesting
thing about that is that I don't like it.
I really don't like it. But perhaps, at least
to some extent is because I am left wing,
because uh right wing people, particularly right wing libertarians,
there are many people who love that book.
I think part of it is that their views
aren't represented often in um It, you know, in
art, I think that, you know, artists tend to
be, uh, you know, More, you know, open, and,
um, I think the more and less conservative, and
I mean conservative, I mean that in a very
broad sense. I think even artists who might lean
right on the political spectrum still have this kind
of maybe broader view of, of people and experiences
because their job is to consider them. You know,
and not just their job, but that's, that's kind
of how they are naturally. They're, they're interested in
people, they're interested in, in situations and picking them
apart. But I, I think with, um, I mean,
Ayn Rand was such an interesting character that I
think that Because people also knew her as a,
as a person and as a philosopher that made
her work. More interesting than it actually was, if
that makes sense, cause it's not, it's very stock
charactery, you know, it's so, it's not, you know,
all the things that we've been talking about, the,
her characters are not multifaceted, you know, they're, they're
really pretty, they're, they're stock, but she's so interesting.
And I also think, you know, like I said,
that, you know, libertarians and, um, kind of, uh,
a certain type of right-leaning person, uh, does not
see their worldview represented in art very often. And
so when it When it gets presented to them,
it's, it, they, they're very attached to it.
Mm. Yeah, but at the same time, then there
are people who In view more of their story
with their own politics and there are even, um,
I mean, I, I can't, I'm not sure if
there's a specific term for this, but uh do
you know authors like Bertolt Brecht or I mean.
Yeah, I, I mean, he was basically his plays,
I, I, I can't remember exactly if he also
wrote poetry or not, but his plays were political
plays. I mean, the purpose for him of writing
the plays he wrote was to sort of create
a political manifesto. In the form of a play,
so, so it's, so the, the, it's not that
the, his works have. Uh, POLITICAL aspects to them,
they are political, but I, it doesn't bother, it
doesn't bother me as much as Ayn Rand does,
and I'm not sure if it's because, again, I'm
left, I'm left wing and he was also sort
of promoting uh left wing values or. If it's
just a properly defined kind of creation that is
political in nature and so it doesn't bother me
and in the case of Ayn Rand, I know
what her political beliefs were and I know that
she manifested them in Atlas Shrugged, but I mean,
it sounds like it was supposed to be a
fictional story, but it's very silly because the characters
are very, are almost caricatures of themselves in terms
of how simplistic they are and things like that.
So, I mean, what do you think of all
of them? Well,
sure, her stories are classic propaganda stories. That, um,
that I think she just, she, I imagine she
did this deliberately because she's, I think, too smart
not to have done it deliberately. She took basically
the Soviet propaganda structure for a story and inverted
it. Um, WHICH, I mean, my back in, uh,
you know, when I was living in, in Prague
in the 1990s, we, uh, my theater company, we
decided to put on a, a communist propaganda play,
and it was really funny because I, I was
in charge of finding the communist propaganda play for
one, because I was the only one who could
read and write check, right? So I was going
through these plays and they were, oh my God,
they were so. God, awful. That it was honestly
hard to get through two pages of them. And
the one I ended up choosing, I chose because
I could actually get through more than a few
pages, and I thought, well, this is the best
we can do. And it was interesting because it
turned out that this play was at one point,
mandatory for every theater in Prague to be putting
on all the time. Like it was all, it
had to be in the repertoire. And It, it
was written by, um, someone who wasn't a, you
know, a playwright, but was very passionate about it.
So maybe that was it, that was part of
it too, because he, he really did put his
heart into it, even though it was an absolute
piece of shite. I mean, it was so terrible
that it's, that it's, yeah, it was just so
terrible. But the other stories, I believe, were so
terrible because real writers were being forced to write
them, and you could kind of feel the resentment.
Yeah, and so they were being written purposefully badly
if that makes sense, whereas I, this Vasha Khanya,
um, who wrote this, uh, communist propaganda play, um.
He, he was just a true believer and it
was so funny because the, the play was so
bad that, um, literally a few days before we
were supposed to, the play was to debut, um,
several of the actors just took off and quit.
And we had to scramble, we took a director
from one of our other plays who played the
title character, and he, he had to like, luckily,
you know, he, he was a Scottish director, but
he'd been an actor, so he could learn the
lines quickly, you know, and, and, um, we, I
mean, we absolutely had to scramble to get this,
uh. To get this story up and We did
by the absolute seat of our pants, and it
ended up being one of our most popular. Plays,
shockingly. And the Czechs loved it, because it was
kind of like a nostalgia piece for them. And
what was really interesting about this play, um, was
that, in order to subvert it. The actors and
directors at these theaters that had to put this
play on decided they were going to play it
like it was Shakespeare, that they were just gonna
play it like they meant it. And so the
audience would be laughing at all the wrong times.
Not the wrong times, but the wrong times as
the writer and as the communists intended, you know,
because they want the, um, They were, they were
trying to put out their message, but of course,
the audience was aware of what a bullshit message
it was, and so when title character, for instance,
had um this monologue about how he was gonna
work for the state. That forget his family, forget
his friends, who cares about anybody? All I care
about is the state, and I'm gonna work my
hands raw for the state. I'll work till I
die for the state. Everyone was laughing, you know,
cause it's, it's absurd. That's the most ridiculous monologue
you could possibly imagine. And, and it went on
for 3 pages. He would not shut up about
it because, you know, the, the author of this
abomination meant it, you know, he was. He was
in a fever, utopian fever dream. And so, um,
Ayn Rand anyway, my point is, sorry, I'm being
a little long winded here, more than a little,
this that Ayn Rand saw that going on in
Soviet Russia, and she had to sit through. Abominations
like that. And so she decided that she was
gonna write. Um, AND a sort of anti-communist propaganda.
That's what I feel. I feel like she very
much did it on purpose. I don't see how
she couldn't have done it on purpose because the
structure was identical, and she knew exactly what a
propaganda play was.
Uh, ARE you familiar with, uh, Jose Saramago's work?
I mean, the Portuguese Nobel Prize in Literature from
1998.
I'm not.
No, I, I mean, it, I, I would also
recommend you his works. I mean, I really love
Sara Saramago, and it's interesting because he has a,
a book in Portuguese is, it's Memorial de Convento.
I'm not sure what's the, uh, English title, but
anyway, it's about how in the 1700s, uh, 1
of our kings, Don Juan Qin to, uh, Built
uh the, a, a convent, a convent in a
city called Mafra, and he basically mobilized the entire
country. I mean, even agriculture was in shambles because
he mobilized most men in the country just to
work on constructing that convent. And, uh, one thing
that Saramago does at a certain point in the
book is because he, he, he, he He was
a communist as well. I mean, he was really
left wing Saramago, uh, but one thing that he
does is that, uh, because he really dislikes the
fact that we say that Don Zhuaning to build,
uh, the convent, uh, the convent of Mare, and
it was not he himself who worked on building
it, it was the workers. He spends like 3
pages just, uh. Enumerating the names of a bunch
of people who work there. So, and you can
skip the three pages and you miss nothing, but
I find that fantastic because it's like a great
manifestation of his own left-wing values. So now I'm
going to spend 3 pages just uh making a
list of names of people, uh, presenting a list
of. NAMES of people who built the convent because
those are the people who deserve to be acknowledged
and not.
Oh my God, yeah, it's, it, you know, it,
it, it's so funny because in a similar vein,
this play that I told you about this communist
propaganda play, uh, in, in, you know, it was
really trying to live its values, so it, it
wanted to employ as many people as possible. So
sometimes. It just made absolutely no sense why a
character who, why is that character even there, would,
would have a line, you know, and, and there
would be this, this almost this like roundabout where
each character would have a line just so that
they would be employed, right? It's so that they
would employ people. So, it was completely uninteresting for
the audience, right? Because it would be like, well,
hello, how are you? I am, you know, it
would just go in this sort of circle where
each person would, would give a, a, a, I
don't know, a line of information that's, that's necessary
for the story that should have been just one
character or two characters relaying that information in a,
in a, in a way that You know, illustrated
their relationship or something, but instead it was just
people randomly giving lines, no reason whatsoever. It was
just hilarious.
Have you watched that Nazi propaganda movie, which you,
uh, I mean, always appears in those kinds of
books like 11,000 movies that you should watch before
you die or something like that, the, the triumph
of the will.
Oh yeah. Oh yeah, I, I,
I, I mean that, that, that movie really pisses
me off because I'm left wing. I mean Nazi
politics are just absolutely despicable, but it's a great
movie. It's like damn it.
It was. I know it's unbelievable. I, I went,
I saw it at an archive, at a, an
archive in Prague. When I was doing research for,
um, the BBC they were doing a whole, uh,
Story on, I think it was the composer Pavel
Haass, who was at, uh, Tin and then got
deported to Auschwitz. And so, I was, I was
doing some research for them, and so I, I
saw Triumph of the Will there, and I also
saw Hitler gives the Jews a Town. The Red
Cross film, right? Um, AND, and a few others,
and it was just amazing. I mean, and on
top of it, to be able to see it
in this old archive, you know, with the, you
know, the reels and everything. I felt like, It
was, you know, 70 years ago or whatever. It
was crazy. But yeah, Lenny, uh, Riefenstall, is that
her name? She, yeah, she's, gosh, what a talent,
you
know. Yeah, I mean, I, I mean, it's, it's
really bad because of the politics, but it's, but
it, but it's really good political propaganda. Oh my
God. I mean, man, if, you know, if, if
every political party had that good political propaganda, hell,
yeah,
no, I, I mean that that's, that's another thing.
I, I wasn't planning on asking you this, but
since the conversation levels, uh, this way. I, I
mean, I hear many times from people, particularly perhaps
people who are more, uh, left wing minded or
something like that, that they say that they tend
to associate art with being intrinsically, I mean, uh,
art as an activity that is intrinsically. Uh, ANTI-TOTALITARIANISM,
anti-dictatorship, and stuff like that, but I, I mean,
I don't agree with that at all. I mean,
you have, you have great, amazing artists that basically,
uh, their creations were very much for the kinds
of regimes they lived in and but that promoted
artistic pieces that promoted very much imperialism, totalitarianism, dictatorship,
and and far right values. Well,
I think people On either side of the political
spectrum, I think, again, when you're a true believer,
you believe you are actually setting people free. With
whatever it is that you're imposing on them, you
believe that that is freedom. Yeah. And you can
see that in Soviet propaganda, where you will, you
can literally find Soviet propaganda that will say something
to the effect of these chains are freedom. Mhm.
You know what I mean? And I, I, I,
that's, that's a, that is a part of the
human experience. I think we see that in religion,
you know, I think that certainly that was, uh,
I've seen that in, in my own, like, in
my own religion, Catholicism, where, um, But it, it's
presented as these strictures are your freedom. This is
your ticket to freedom, right? And um you see
it in politics, you see it, um. In all
sorts of stories and, you know, I, I in
folk stories even, and, and, um, I think you
even see it in sex practices, like with, uh,
like BDSM and things like that, which I think
kind of have trickled down from Catholicism, um, but
it it's, it's this concept that we clearly relate
to, to some extent at least, or to a
large extent as humans that, um, Certain strictures allow
for freedom, and that's not untrue, because, uh, you
know, it's, we were just talking about storytelling, and
I was saying as I've become more disciplined in
my storytelling, I actually feel like it's gotten better.
When I've gone from being a pantr to a
plotter, and I was a pantr for most of
my writing, you know, life, um. So, you know,
there is some truth to that. We have to
have order in our society in order to feel
um And, you know, to, just, just to have
a high trust society, you, you feel a lot
more free in a high, high trust society, but
when it's too ordered, it's stifling. You know, we
were talking about the difference between, you know, a,
like a western city and a city like Doha.
Doha feels, um, like you're always in church. Yeah.
If you're in a really nice restaurant, you know,
or, and there's music playing, there's, there's a, there's
just this incredibly, um, you know, orderly churchy vibe
to it. Whereas, uh, you know, you just feel.
A lot more, you know, a, a sense of
fun and, and revelry when you go to even
just like a small cafe in a western city.
Yeah, no, look, I, I already know what we're
going to talk about next time, next year. Uh,
WE don't have time to do it today because
we only have 20 more minutes. I don't want
to get into the topic because we will, we,
we would, we would be here for another 2
hours and we just don't have the time today,
unfortunately, but next time we have to talk about.
Uh, SEPARATING the art from the artist, that's, uh,
that's another very interesting topic because I mean, whether
people like to admit it or not. I, I
mean, I guess this is not a very controversial
point to make. Some of the best art ever
created, even more so when it comes to architecture
and sculpture, has been made in. And to promote
er violent regimes and totalitarian regimes and absolutist regimes.
I mean, I, I mean, I live in Europe,
you live there, er you know this very well.
I mean we have some of the best architecture.
In the world from old ancient regimes and they
were not very good when it comes to promoting
like human rights and stuff like that.
No. Um, uh, YEAH, no, I could talk about
that for, forever, uh. It's It's funny cause this
is dotted line connected to this topic, um, here
in, you know, in the town I live in
in Virginia, you know, when, um, There, there, you
know, when the, the BLM riots happened and, uh,
you know, there was, there was just a, a,
a real reckoning that was, that was going on
that, um, That people were feeling very passionate about,
so there was a lot of renaming. And which
is understandable, and that happens throughout history, you know,
you've, you've, there's a shift in anything from Political
regime to just a vibe, you know, and, and
you rename things, but there is this school that,
um, By my, by where my daughter lives, that
uh used to be named after, you know, I
think someone who was an original founder of this
town or whatever, and I don't even know what
it is that that person did in their past.
Maybe they were a slaveholder or, you know, had
some kind of unsavory view, but they were, you
know, an important person here, and they renamed the
school, but they renamed the school, um. Uh, THE
trailblazer school or something, and I walked by it
and I was like, well, couldn't they have found
that sounds like a summer camp. Or like a
sports team. Couldn't they have found like somebody, um,
somebody else, you know, who, who, you know, perhaps
like an like an an African American of, of
who, who, you know, invented something. There are so
many of them. Couldn't they have named the school
after that? Why did they have to make it
sound like a summer camp, for heaven's sake, you
know. But, um, but yeah, those, those are, uh.
That'll be a really, really interesting topic to, to
go into, cause I get, I get it. Sometimes,
you know, I mean, what's worse than meeting a
hero, meeting one of your heroes, and you discover
that they are just Despicable, or unpleasant, or whatever,
or unsavory. It sucks.
Yeah, I mean, and I guess that particularly for,
I don't know, people who lived during the Renaissance
and even in more ancient times. I mean, if
you were an artist. If you didn't have a
lot of options. I mean, basically, if you wanted
to live off your art, you had to have
patrons, and patrons were the people who have money
and people who have money were the ones who
benefited from being part of the regime, and they
would want you to create pieces of art to
promote those kinds of political values, right?
Yeah, it's, yeah, those things are all connected. And
you know, you have some, you have some artists
who are like chased out of towns because they
were preying on 12 year old girls, you know,
and yet they created beautiful art. And, and so,
um, That's a real conundrum, I think, for us,
especially right now when that information is so readily
available, because, you know, in past generations, you might
not have known that even about the artist, because
that that information just wasn't widely available. Their life
while they were living was not that interesting because
their art wasn't known. They weren't famous. Until after
they died, and so nobody even took note of
who they were, and what they thought, and, and
what they were doing, and you really would have
to excavate in order to find out that someone
was a real son of a bitch, you know
what I mean? But now, all that information is
so readily available, and so, people seem to be
seeing simultaneously the person's work and who they are.
Yeah, you know, yeah, uh, and I, and I,
yeah, I, I mean, and in even now, of
course, even nowadays it's very hard to earn a
living as just an artist, but there, there were
many people that even, I guess, died in poverty,
creating great pieces of art, uh, like, for example,
even Here in Portugal, there's Luis Camoins, the, the
writer who created the, the Luzads. The Luzads is
basically um Uh, an, an epic poem, and it
was an epic poem about the history of Portugal
up till the 16th century when he was alive
and he dedicated the poem to Don Sebastian, who
was the king in power back when he wrote
the poem, and I mean it's a very long
poem, it's a, a divine comedy style of poem,
so it's a a a very long one. Uh,
AND basically he did that. He wrote the poem.
Even today, we have a holiday in Portugal, which
is, I mean, the one of the most important
holidays. It's the day of Portugal. Luis Camoins, the
guy, and Portuguese community, so we, he has his
own holi holiday. He's the only Portuguese person in
history with his name in the holiday, and, and
yet he wrote the poem, he dedicated the poem
to the king, and he died in poverty.
Yeah, I know, it's amazing. I mean, Edgar Allan
Poe died in poverty. It's um, you know, I,
I, I. If I could like if if I
had a better, better memory, like a better like
instant recall, I could probably come up with a
list of 10. 10 artists who died in poverty
who, you know, Whose work is everywhere now and
it's so instantly recognizable and their, their work is
worth God only knows how much money, and they
could barely feed themselves and, you know, often died
of like consumption, you know, in some hole in
the wall.
Yeah. OK, so I mean, should we leave it
here? I mean, leave just the no, no, no
problem. I understand that. So yeah, I guess we
are, we're already leaving people with the teaser for
our next conversation next year. So, and I guess
this is a good point to wrap up our
conversation, so. Hi guys, thank you for watching this
interview until the end. If you liked it, please
share it, leave a like and hit the subscription
button. The show is brought to you by Enlights
Learning and Development done differently. Check their website at
enlights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or PayPal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
PayPal supporters, Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard
Seyaz Olaf, Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolff,
Tim Hollis, Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly.
Then Dmitri Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin
Holbrookfield, Governor, Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun,
Svergoo, and Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labran, John Yardston,
and Samuel Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom
Hammel, Sardusran, David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach,
Diego Londono Correa. Yannik Punter Darusmani, Charlotte Blis Nico
Barbaro, Adam Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman,
Semov Zal Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel
Pancortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony
Smith, and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg
Jarno, Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin,
David Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D.
Lee Jr. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber,
Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix,
Mark Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly
Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson,
Ismael Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate
Van Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali
Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David
Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A
special thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank
Lucas Stinnik, Tom Vanneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller,
Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro,
Al Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my
executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and
Rosie. Thank you for all.